On the fragmentation workload, ptmalloc2 was the worst performer both in terms of fragmentation ratio and allocation rate.
Surprisingly jemalloc's allocation rate was much better than that of tcmalloc (nearly 2x better). I was skeptical about this. On the other hand, the RSS bloat measure was negative for jemalloc because the fragmentation workload wasn't really writing to any of the allocated objects. While jemalloc uses mmap for allocating virtual address space, the returned addresses are only mapped to physical memory upon writes. For security reasons, any memory region returned by the kernel for private & anonymous memory map operations must be zeroed to provide complete isolation between processes. It is possible that the physical pages mapped to the virtual address space of the current process may have been owned by some other process in the past. Given that most processes create anonymous memory maps but seldom use all of it, the kernel uses a special rea-only physical page full of zeros called the zero page (or zero folio). This avoids the cost of zeroing at the time of allocation and defers it till the time the process actually writes to these pages. Whenever writes do happen, minor page faults are generated to allocate physical pages. Till this time, RSS used by the process doesn't grow. To workaround this problem, I added a write operation via memcpy for a fixed 256 B sequence for both the small allocation (256 B) and the large allocation (16384 B). By forcing writes to happen via memcpy, physical pages would be mapped to the virtual memory of the process. This would be a more accurate reflection of real-world workloads as well. After this the jemalloc allocation rate was reduced to 50%. Still I was surprised why tcmalloc's allocation rate was still lower than jemalloc. I wondered about all the other logical pages for the large allocation done by jemalloc. There was an option to zero all mmap-ed pages in jemalloc. Upon enabling that, jemalloc became really slow. This was only meant for debugging but it helped me understand the cost of zero-ing. I wondered whether tcmalloc was pre-faulting some of the pages prior to usage by the program that I wrote. After reading about tcmalloc's internals, I found out that tcmalloc would allocate runs of pages (called a span) and then carve it up into slices of desired object sizes. It maintains a free list of objects in its middle-end hich is size-class specific. In order to support efficient iteration over the free list, the carved objects are represented using internal data structures that add pointers in the free list (a singly linked list). This addition of pointers would touch the allocated 4 KiB virtual pages thus pre-faulting the pages (minor faults). This would lead to an eager allocation of physical memory before the program performs any writes on the objects. This was verified by running a test program doing allocations on a schedule with strace. Perf stat command was used to count the number of minor page faults for validation of our theory. However, this didn't turn out to be the smoking gun. There was no way to change some of the tcmalloc tunables without re-building it with a different set of compilation flags. From an earlier perf record, I could find the hot paths in tcmalloc's code which were consuming a lot of CPU cycles. From strace, I could see that tcmalloc was using sbrk which shouldn't have happened. Then I realised later that we were using an earlier version of tcmalloc (4.5.9) which was still using sbrk for sysmalloc. Luckily, there was an option (not very documented) to force tcmalloc to only use mmap and after turning it on, it led to substantial perf improvements. 
ptmalloc2 discussions:
why is it so slow? what is the bottleneck for performance?
A high amount of CPU usage in the kernel space.
M_TRIM_THRESHOLD - TBD
M_TOP_PAD - TBD (heap was being grown very frequently for the large allocations)
Whenever the heap was grown, an mprotect syscall was also happening which used to take time because of higher contention on the osq/rwsmem. Upon setting MALLOC_TOP_PAD_ (yes there is an underscore at the end of the environment variable name), the performance of ptmalloc2 improved a lot. Why was the heap being grown frequently? It was due to the small allocations. Debugging this was a pain on RHEL primarily because RHEL doesn't provide debug binaries for glibc in a straight-forward way. You need to first enroll your RHEL machine to an existing subscription in order to setup the required repositories for running debuginfo-install. Eventually gave up on it because of running RHEL in a sort of air-gapped environemnt. This was not happening anytime soon in a production environment. Enabled debug builds for my program and then used addr2line to convert the hex addresses in my toy program to find that these mprotect calls were indeed coming the malloc calls for the 16 KiB objects. But why? The devil is in the details as they say. This required understanding how ptmalloc2 worked as a best-fit allocator (mostly). This required running some test programs with a lot of strace outputs to develop the intuition after reading about the implementation details. 
But where is the sysmalloc call coming from? Ran the program in a single threaded mode to discard the possibility of arena contention. It was obvious that the top chunk on the active heap was depleted and didn't have enough memory to accommodate the 16 KiB request. The typical allocation path is as follows:
Whenever the application requests for memory to be allocated via malloc, the request size is classified into a bin (more of a range). The allocating thread may or may not be attached with an arena. If there is no arena, then a new arena will be created along with a new heap. An arena is a collection of heaps linked together (only the latest one is active for new allocations). The thread-cache stores one singly linked list per bin with a maximum of 64 bins (7 chunks per bin). A chunk is an object which is a wrapper over the original allocation request. The thread-level caching construct minimizes the chances of lock contention by providing a per-thread lockless fast allocation path. It works based on a temporal and spatial locality patterns typically prevalent in application threads. When objects are freed by an application thread, if they are small enough (<= 1024 B), they are placed into one of the tcache bins. This provides a fast path for allocations happening in the same thread for objects of similar size or lower. Unfortunately, large objects bypass the thread cache entirely. ptmalloc2 maintains a group of free lists organized by chunk size (chunk size is alloc request size + metadata + padding). It needs to do this for providing faster best-fit allocations. The chunk sizes can be classified into different bins (fast bins, unsorted bins and large bins). If the chunk size is within (16B - 80 B) then the freed chunk goes into one of the fast bins which are not really sorted. This provides a fast allocation path for smaller requests while causing higher fragmentation (tradeoff). This is okay for really small allocations for the ROI we get. Whenever chunks are freed, they are placed in unsorted bins. 







  
